---
title: 第三周(群论)
---

:::tip 目录
1. Group
2. Basic Properties of Group
3. Subgroups
4. Cyclic Groups
5. Coset and Lagrange's Theorem
:::

# Group 

## Definition

A group is a set $G$ and an operator "." on the elements, satisfies the following axioms:

- Closure: $\forall a, b \in G, a \cdot b \in G$.
- Association: $(a \cdot b) \cdot c = a \cdot (b \cdot c)$
- There is an element "$e \in G$" called identify, s.t. $e \cdot a = a \cdot e = a$
- $\forall a \in G$, there exists $a^{-1} \in G$ called inverse, such that $a \cdot a^{-1} = e = a^{-1} \cdot a$

:::tip Examples
- $(Z, +)$ is a group, while $(Z, \times)$ is not a group
- $(Q, +)$ and $(R, +)$ are groups
- $(Q^*, \times)$ and $(R^*, \times)$ are groups
:::

## Some important groups

:::important Groups
- $Z_n$ (the order of $Z_n$ group is **n**)

Let n be an integer, $Z_n = \{0, 1, 2, \cdots, n-1\}$ forms a group under the operation of addition. However, $(Z_n, \times)$ is not a group.

- $Z^*_p$ (the order of $Z_p^*$ group is **n-1**)

Let p be a prime number, $Z^*_p = \{1, 2, \cdots, p-1\}$ forms a group under the operation of multiplication.

- $Z_n^*$ (the order of $Z_n^*$ group is **n-1**)

Let n be an integer, $Z^*_n = \{a \in [1 \cdots n-1] \text{and} gcd(a, n) = 1\}$ forms a group under the operation of multiplication. 
:::

# Basic Properties of Group

## Proposition

- Proposition 1

The identity element in a Group $G$ is unique; that is, there exists only one element $e \in G$ s.t. $eg = ge = g$ for all $g \in G$

:::info Proof
Suppose $\exist e, e^\prime \in G$ are identities. Then:
- $ee^\prime = e^\prime$
- $ee^\prime = e$

Combining these two equations, we have $e = ee^\prime = e^\prime$
:::

- Proposition 2

If $\forall g \in G$, then the inverse of $g$, $g^{-1}$, is unique

:::info Proof
If $g^{-1}$ and $g^\prime$ both are the inverse of g, then

$$g^\prime = g^\prime e = g^\prime(gg^{-1}) = (g^\prime)g^{-1} = eg^{-1} = g^{-1}$$
###
:::

- Proposition 3

Let $G$ be a group. If $a, b \in G$, then $(ab)^{-1} = b^{-1}a^{-1}$

:::info Proof
By construction

- $ab(b^{-1}a^{-1}) = e$
- $(b^{-1}a^{-1})ab = e$
:::

- Proposition 4

Let $G$ be a group, $\forall g \in G, (g^{-1})^{-1} = g$

:::info proof
$$(g^{-1})^{-1} = (gg^{-1})(g^{-1})^{-1} = g(g^{-1}(g^{-1})^{-1}) = ge = g$$
:::

- Proposition 5

Let $G$ be a group, for any two elements $a, b \in G$. Then the equation $ax = b \text{and} xa = b$ have unique solutions in G.

- Proposition 6

(Cancellation law) Let $G$ be a group, and $a, b, c \in G$. Then $ba = ca$ implies $b = c$ and $ab = ac$ implies $b = c$.

- Notions

:::tip Notations
- $g^0 = e$
- $g^n = g \cdot g \cdots g \text{ (n times)}$
- $g^{-n} = g^{-1} \cdot g^{-1} \cdots g^{-1} \text{ (n times)}$
:::

- Order

The order of a finite group is the number of elements that it contains. If $G$ is a group containing n elements, we say $|G| = n$

# Subgroups

## Definition

Let $G$ be a group and $H$ a subset of $G$. If $H$ is a group under group operation in $G$, then $H$ is said to be a subgroup of $G$, denoted by $H \leq G$

:::tip Examples of Subgroup
- For any group $G$, there is a trivial subgroup $\{ e \}$
- The additive groups: $Z \leq Q \leq R \leq C$
- $\forall n \in Z, nZ = \{kn | k \in Z\}$ is a subgroup of Z 
:::

## Proposition

A nonempty subset $H$ of a group $G$ is a subgroup of $G$ if and only if $H \neq \empty$, and $ab^{-1} \in H$ for all $a, b \in H$

:::tip 子群判定方法
- 验证四条群公理(封闭，结合，单位元，逆元)
  
- If a **nonempty** subset $H$ of a group $G$ is subgroup of $G$ if and only if:
  - If $a, b \in H$, then $ab \in H$
  - If $a \in H$, then $a^{-1} \in H$

- If a **nonempty** subset $H$ of a group $G$ is subgroup of $G$ if and only if $\forall a, b \in H, ab^{-1} \in H$

- If a **nonempty** subset $H$ of a finite order group $G$ is subgroup of $G$ if and only if each element in $H$ is closed under the operation of $G$
:::

### 例题

:::warning 注意
在验证$ab^{-1}$的归属之前注意判断非空
:::

- 设$G$是阿贝尔群，$m$是任意整数, 记$G^m = \{g^m : g \in G \}$. 请证明$G^m$是$G$的一个子群.

- 设$G$是阿贝尔群, $m$是任意整数, 记$G[m] = \{ g \in G : g^m = e \}$. 请证明$G[m]$是$G$的一个子群.

:::caution 易错点
类似这样的题要注意变量，是g还是m
:::

# Cyclic Groups

:::tip Theorem
Let $G$ be a group and $g$ be any element in $G$. Then the set 

$$\langle g \rangle = \{g^k : k \in Z\}$$

is a subgroup of $G$. We call $\langle g \rangle$ the cyclic group generated by $g$, and $g$ is a generator of the group.
:::

## Some examples

- $(Z, +)$ is a cyclic group, while 1 is the generator.
- $(Z_n, +)$ is a cyclic group, while 1 is the generator.
- $\langle i \rangle$ is a cyclic group, while i is the generator.
- $Z^*_p$ is a cyclic group, while p is a prime.
- $Z_n^*$ is **NOT** a cyclic group, while n in composite.

## Primitive Root

### Definition

Let a and n be relatively prime integers with n > 0. The order of a modulo n in the smallest exponent $e \geq$ 1 such that $a^e \equiv 1 \pmod{n}$. If the order of a modulo n equals to the largest possible order modulo n, then a is called a primitive root modulo n.

## Properties of Cyclic Groups

:::important Theorem
Let $G = \langle g \rangle$ be a cyclic group of order n. Then $g^k = e$ if and only if n divides k.
:::

:::important Theorem
Let $G = \langle g \rangle$ be a cyclic group of order. If $h = g^k$ then the order of h is $\frac{n}{d}$, where $d = gcd(k, n)$.

- Proof.

Let m be the least positive number s.t. $h^m = g^{km} = e$.
1. Then n | km, equivalently, (n / d) | (k / d)m.
2. Since d = gcd(k, n), n / d and k / d are relatively prime. Thus, (n/d) | (k/d)m implies (n/d)m. The smallest such m is n/d.
:::

### EX

- 通过生成元找生成元
  - 请找出群$Z^*_{11}$的所有生成元

- 求生成元个数
  - 列举$Z_{10}$的所有生成元
  - p和q是两个不同素数，请问$Z_{pq}$有多少个生成元

- 拓展
  - 如果$p$是素数，则$Z_p$没有非平凡子群

:::tip Corollary
Let $G = \langle g \rangle$ be a cyclic group of order n then there are exactly $\phi(n)$ generators in $G$.
:::

# Coset

## Definition

Let $G$ be a group and $H$ a subgroup of $G$. Define a left coset of $H$ with representative $g \in G$ to be the set

$$gH = \{gh : h \in H\}$$

Right coset can be defined similarly by

$$Hg = \{hg : h \in H\}$$

## Properties of Coset

### The number of the elements in a coset
:::tip Number of element
Let $G$ be a group and $H$ a subgroup of $G$. $\forall g \in G$, the number of elements in $H$ is the same as the number of elements in $gH$

Proof:

证明$f: H \rightarrow gH$是一个双射。

1. 证明f是个单射
2. 证明f是个满射

个人提出一个猜想:

$$\forall f : A \rightarrow f(A) \text{, if f is a injective map then f must be a onto map}$$

若要证明双射，只需证明满射，只需证明

$$\forall b \in f(A), \exist a \in A \text{, s.t.} f(a) = b$$

因为

$$f(A) = \{f(a) | a \in A\}$$

所以

$$\forall b \in f(A), b = f(a), a \in A$$

即证
:::

### Identical or isolation

:::tip Theorem
Let $G$ be a group and $H$ a subgroup of $G$, $\forall g_1, g_2 \in G$, then $g_1H = g_2H$ or $g_1H \cap g_2H = \empty$

Proof:

If $g_1H \cap g_2H \neq \empty$, then $g_1H = g_2H$

Since $g_1H \cap g_2H \neq \empty$, $\exist h_1, h_2 \in H, g_1h_1 = g_2h_2$

- $\forall g_1h \in g_1H, g_1h = g$
:::